How does default discrimination happen in a computer system that doesn't even know a
person's race?
We usually treat automation as the ultimate solution to human bias, replacing prejudice
with objective math.
Take the automated risk assessment tools that judges use to predict if a prospective parolee
will re-offend.
The algorithm collects standard, neutral-sounding inputs, like financial history, education,
and neighborhood characteristics, to generate a numerical risk score.
The formula explicitly excludes race to stay perfectly colorblind, yet real-world studies
show these tools falsely flag black defendants as high risk at almost twice the rate of white
defendants.
Why?
Because the calculation relies on a neutral data point that secretly carries the weight
of historical inequality, a stand-in called a proxy.
Take neighborhood data, for instance.
Because certain areas are historically segregated and heavily over-patrolled by police, the
geographic data itself is already deeply skewed.
Researchers don't have to write malicious code to automate anti-Blackness, they just
have to build their tool on top of an already unequal society.
And that perspective parolee from the beginning?
The algorithm denies them release, not by predicting their future, but by mathematically
scoring the historical inequalities of their neighborhood.